Announcement blogpost for the 1.15 release (#526)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2022-04-11-1.15-announcement.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing the Release of Apache Flink 1.15"
subtitle: ""
date: 2022-04-11T08:00:00.000Z
categories: news
authors:
- yungao:
  name: "Yun Gao"
  twitter: "YunGao16"
- joemoe:
  name: "Joe Moser"
  twitter: "JoemoeAT"

---

Thanks to our well-organized, kind, and open community, Apache Flink continues 
[to grow](https://www.apache.org/foundation/docs/FY2021AnnualReport.pdf) as a 
technology. We are and remain one of the most active projects in
the Apache community. With release 1.15, we are proud to announce a number of 

> exciting changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to our well-organized and open community, Apache Flink continues 
[to grow](https://www.apache.org/foundation/docs/FY2021AnnualReport.pdf) as a 
technology and remain one of the most active projects in
the Apache community. With the release of Flink 1.15, we are proud to announce a number of 
exciting changes.
```

> One of the main concepts that makes Apache Flink stand out is the unification of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main features that makes Apache Flink stand out is the unification of 
```

Author: i think it is rather a concept than a feature.

> batch (aka bounded data) and streaming (aka unbounded data) processing. A lot of 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
batch (aka bounded) and stream (aka unbounded) data processing. A lot of 
```
nit

effort went into this in the last releases but we are only getting started there. 
Apache Flink is not only growing when it comes to contributions and users, it is 
also growing out of the original use cases and personas. Like the whole industry, 
it is moving more towards business/analytics use cases that are implemented as 

> low-/no-code. The feature that represents the most within the Flink space is 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
low-/no-code. The feature that represents this the most within the Flink space is 
```

> low-/no-code. The feature that represents the most within the Flink space is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effort went into this unification in the previous releases but you can expect more efforts in this direction. 
Apache Flink is not only growing when it comes to contributions and users, but
also out of the original use cases. We are seeing a trend towards more business/analytics 
use cases implemented in low-/no-code. Flink SQL is the feature in the Flink ecosystem that enables such uses cases and is why its popularity continues to grow.  
```

> Flink SQL. That’s why its popularity continues to grow. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Apache Flink is considered an essential building block in data architectures.  It 
> is included with other technologies to drive all sorts of use cases. New ideas pop 
> up, existing technologies establish themselves as standards for solving some aspects 
> of a problem. In order to be successful, it is important that the experience of 
> integrating with Apache Flink is as seamless and easy as possible. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Flink is an essential building block in data pipelines/architectures and 
is used with many other technologies in order to drive all sorts of use cases. While new ideas/products
may appear in this domain, existing technologies continue to establish themselves as standards for solving 
mission-critical problems. Knowing that we have such a wide reach and play a role in the success of many 
projects, it is important that the experience of 
integrating with Apache Flink is as seamless and easy as possible. 
```

> In the 1.15 release the Apache Flink community made significant progress across all 
> these areas. Still those are not the only things that made it into 1.15. The 
> contributors improved the experience of operating Apache Flink by making it much 
> easier and more transparent to handle checkpoints and savepoints and their ownership, 
> making auto scaling more seamless and complete, by removing side effects of use cases 
> in which different data sources produce varying amounts of data, and - finally - the 
> ability to upgrade SQL jobs without losing the state. By continuing on supporting 
> checkpoints after tasks finished and adding window table valued functions in batch 
> mode, the experience of unified stream and batch processing was once more improved 
> making hybrid use cases way easier. In the SQL space, not only the first step in 
> version upgrades have been added but also JSON functions to make it easier to import 
> and export structured data in SQL. Both will allow users to better rely on Flink SQL 
> for production use cases in the long term. To establish Apache Flink as part of the 
> data processing ecosystem we improved the cloud interoperability and added more sink 
> connectors and formats. And yes we enabled a Scala-free runtime 
> ([the hype is real](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the 1.15 release, the Apache Flink community made significant improvements across multiple areas,
which will be discussed in this post! 
```

Author: @infoverload why is it bad to have an overview on the very top?

* it quickly provides an overview on what has happened.
* it is not bad to mention things a couple of times.

> ## Operating Apache Flink with joy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Apache Flink operations and support made easier
```

> ## Operating Apache Flink with joy
> 
> Even jobs that have been built and tuned by the best engineering teams still need to 
> be operated. Looking at the lifecycle of Flink based projects most of them are built 
> to stay, putting long-term burdens on the people operating them. The many deployment 
> patterns, APIs, tuneable configs, and use cases covered by Apache Flink come at the 
> high cost of support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Operating Apache Flink with ease

Even Flink jobs that have been built and tuned by the best engineering teams still need to 
be operated, usually on a long-term basis. The many deployment 
patterns, APIs, tuneable configs, and use cases covered by Apache Flink mean that operation
support is vital and can be burdensome.

In this release, we listened to user feedback and now operating Flink is made much 
easier. It is now more transparent in terms of handling checkpoints and savepoints and their ownership, 
which makes auto-scaling more seamless and complete (by removing side effects of use cases 
where different data sources produce varying amounts of data) and enables the  
ability to upgrade SQL jobs without losing the state. 
```

> ### Clarifying checkpoint and savepoint semantics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Clarification of checkpoint and savepoint semantics
```

> An essential cornerstone of Flink’s fault tolerance strategy is based on 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cornerstone of Flink’s fault tolerance strategy is based on 
```

Author: it is not _the_ cornerstone, there are also others.

> [checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints/)
> [and](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints_vs_savepoints/) 
> [savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints/) and 
[savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/) (see [the comparison](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints_vs_savepoints/). 
```
nit: I would be concerned that putting three links behind each other doesn't make it clear from the start that those are actually three links.

Author: @XComp we don't have the same understanding of linking humour. :)

> The intention of savepoints has always been to put transitions, 
> backups, and upgrades of Apache Flink jobs in the control of users, checkpoints, on 
> the other hand, are intended to be fully controlled by Flink and guarantee fault 
> tolerance through fast recovery, fail over, etc. Both concepts are quite similar and 
> the underlying implementation also shares the same ideas and some aspects. Still, 
> both concepts have grown apart by following specific feature requests and sometimes 
> neglecting the overarching idea and strategy. It became apparent that this should be 
> aligned and harmonized better. It has been leading to situations in which users have 
> been relying on checkpoints to stop and restart jobs whereas savepoints would have 
> been the right way to go. Also savepoints are fairly slower as they don’t include 
> some of the features that made taking checkpoints so fast. In some cases like 
> resuming from a retained checkpoint in which the checkpoint is somehow considered as 
> a savepoint but it is unclear to the user when they can actually clean it up. To sum 
> it up: users have been confused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of savepoints has always been to put transitions, 
backups, and upgrades of Flink jobs in the control of users. Checkpoints, on 
the other hand, are intended to be fully controlled by Flink and guarantee fault 
tolerance through fast recovery, failover, etc. Both concepts are quite similar and 
the underlying implementation also shares aspects of the same ideas. 

However, both concepts grew apart by following specific feature requests and sometimes 
neglecting the overarching idea and strategy. Based on user feedback, it became apparent that this should be 
aligned and harmonized better and, above all, to make more clear! 

There have been situations in which users relied on checkpoints to stop/restart jobs when savepoints would have 
been the right way to go. It was also not clear that savepoints are slower since they don’t include 
some of the features that make taking checkpoints so fast. In some cases like 
resuming from a retained checkpoint in which the checkpoint is somehow considered a 
a savepoint, it is unclear to the user when they can actually clean it up. 
```

> With [FLIP-193 (Snapshots ownership)](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-193%3A+Snapshots+ownership) 
> the community aims to make the ownership the only difference between savepoint and 
> checkpoint. In the 1.15 release the community has fixed some of those shortcomings 
> by supporting 
> [native and incremental savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#savepoint-format). 
> Savepoints always used to use the 
> canonical format which made them slower. Also writing full savepoints for sure takes 
> longer than doing it in an incremental way. With 1.15 if users use the native format 
> to take savepoints as well as the RocksDB state backend, savepoints will be 
> automatically taken in an incremental manner. The documentation has also been 
> clarified to provide a better overview and understanding of the differences between 
> checkpoints and savepoints. The semantics for 
> [resuming from savepoint/retained checkpoint](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#resuming-from-savepoints) 
> have also been clarified introducing the CLAIM and NO_CLAIM mode. With 
> the CLAIM mode Flink takes over ownership of an existing snapshot, with NO_CLAIM it 
> creates its own copy and leaves the existing one up to the user. Please note that 
> NO_CLAIM mode is the new default behavior. The old semantic of resuming from 
> savepoint/retained checkpoint is still accessible but has to be manually selected by 
> choosing LEGACY mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [FLIP-193 (Snapshots ownership)](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-193%3A+Snapshots+ownership) 
the community aims to make ownership the only differentiating factor between savepoints and 
checkpoints. In the 1.15 release, the community has worked towards that goal and fixed several shortcomings 
by supporting 
[native and incremental savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#savepoint-format). 

The native format of savepoints always made them slower than checkpoints and writing full savepoints takes much 
longer than doing it in an incremental way. In Flink 1.15, if users use the native format 
to take savepoints with the RocksDB state backend, savepoints will be 
automatically taken in an incremental manner. 

The documentation has also been 
clarified to provide a better overview and understanding of the differences between 
checkpoints and savepoints. The semantics for 
[resuming from savepoints or retained checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#resuming-from-savepoints) 
have also been clarified by introducing the CLAIM and NO_CLAIM mode. With 
the CLAIM mode Flink takes over ownership of an existing snapshot, whereas with NO_CLAIM it 
creates its own copy and leaves the existing one up to the user. Please note that 
NO_CLAIM mode is the new default behavior. The old semantic of resuming from 
savepoint or retained checkpoint is still accessible but has to be manually selected by 
choosing LEGACY mode.
```

Author: this is not right.

> ### Elastic scaling: Adaptive scheduler/reactive mode
> 
> Driven by the increasing number of cloud services built on top of Apache Flink, the 
> project becomes increasingly cloud native. As part of this development, elastic 
> scaling grows in importance. This release improves metrics for the reactive mode 
> (Job scope), adds an exception history for the adaptive scheduler, and speeds up 
> down-scaling by 10x.
> 
> To achieve that, dealing with metrics has been improved making all the metrics in 
> the Job scope work correctly when reactive mode is enabled 
> ([yes, only limitations have been removed from the documentation](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/17766/files)). 
> The TaskManager now has a dedicated 
> shutdown code path, where it actively deregisters itself from the cluster instead 
> of relying on heartbeats, giving the JobManager a clear signal for downscaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Elastic scaling with reactive mode and the adaptive scheduler

Driven by the increasing number of cloud services built on top of Apache Flink, the 
project is increasingly cloud native which makes elastic 
scaling more and more important. 

This release improves metrics for the [reactive mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#reactive-mode), which is a job-scope mode where the JobManager will try to use all TaskManager resources available. To do this, we made all the metrics in 
the Job scope work correctly when reactive mode is enabled 
([yes, only limitations have been removed from the documentation](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/17766/files)). 

We also added an exception history for the [adaptive scheduler](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-160%3A+Adaptive+Scheduler), which is a new scheduler that first declares the required resources and waits for them before deciding on the parallelism with which to execute a job. 

Furthermore, downscaling is sped up by 10x. The TaskManager now has a dedicated 
shutdown code path, where it actively deregisters itself from the cluster instead 
of relying on heartbeats, giving the JobManager a clear signal for downscaling.
```

> ### Watermark alignment across sources
> 
> Having sources that are increasing the watermarks at a different pace could lead to 
> problems with downstream operators. Some operators might need to buffer excessive 
> amounts of data which could lead to huge operator states. For sources based on the 
> new source interface, 
> [watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment-_beta_)
> can be activated. Users can define 
> alignment groups for which consuming from sources which are too far ahead from others 
> are paused. The ideal case for aligned watermarks is when there are two or more 
> sources that produce watermarks at a different speed and when the source has the same 
> parallelism as splits/shards/partitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Watermark alignment across data sources

Having data sources that increase watermarks at different paces could lead to 
problems with downstream operators. For example, some operators might need to buffer excessive 
amounts of data which could lead to huge operator states. This is why we introduced watermark alignment
in this release.

For sources based on the new source interface, 
[watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment-_beta_)
can be activated. Users can define 
alignment groups to pause consuming from sources which are too far ahead from others. The ideal scenario for aligned watermarks is when there are two or more 
sources that produce watermarks at a different speed and when the source has the same 
parallelism as splits/shards/partitions.
```

### SQL version upgrades

The execution plan of SQL queries and its resulting topology is based on optimization 
rules and a cost model. This means even minimal changes could introduce a completely 
different topology. This dynamic setting makes guaranteeing snapshot compatibility 
really hard across Flink versions. In the efforts of 1.15, the community put the focus 
on keeping the same query up and running even after upgrades. At the core of SQL 
upgrades are JSON plans 
([for now we have only documentation in our JavaDoc, while we are still working on updating the documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/api/java/org/apache/flink/table/api/CompiledPlan.html)), 
they have been introduced for 
internal use already in previous releases and will now be exposed. Both the Table API 
and SQL will provide a way to compile and execute a plan which guarantees the same 
topology throughout versions. This feature will be released as an experimental MVP. 
Users who want to give it a try already can create a JSON plan that can then be used 
to restore a Flink Job based on the old operator structure. The first real upgrade 

> will then happen in Flink 1.16.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution plan of SQL queries and its resulting topology is based on optimization 
rules and a cost model. This means that even minimal changes could introduce a completely 
different topology. This dynamism makes guaranteeing snapshot compatibility 
very challenging across different Flink versions. In the efforts of 1.15, the community focused 
on keeping the same query (via the same topology) up and running even after upgrades. 

At the core of SQL upgrades are JSON plans 
([please note that we only have documentation in our JavaDocs for now and are still working on updating the documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/api/java/org/apache/flink/table/api/CompiledPlan.html)), which are JSON functions that make it easier to import and export structured data in SQL. This has been introduced for 
internal use already in previous releases and will now be exposed externally. Both the Table API 
and SQL will provide a way to compile and execute a plan which guarantees the same 
topology throughout different versions. This feature will be released as an experimental MVP. 
Users who want to give it a try already can create a JSON plan that can then be used 
to restore a Flink job based on the old operator structure. The full feature can be expected 
in Flink 1.16.

Reliable upgrades makes Flink SQL more dependable for production use cases in the long term. 
```

### Changelog state backend

> From Flink 1.15, we have the MVP feature of 
> [changelog state](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog)
> backend, which aims at 
> making checkpoint intervals shorter with following advantages:
> 
> 1. Less work on recovery: The more frequently a checkpoint is taken, the fewer events 
>    need to be re-processed after recovery.
> 2. Lower latency for transactional sinks: Transactional sinks commit on checkpoints, 
>    so faster checkpoints mean more frequent commits.
> 3. More predictable checkpoint intervals: Currently the length of the checkpoint mainly
>    depends on the size of the artifacts that need to be persisted on the checkpoint 
>    storage, by keeping the size small it becomes more predictable.
> 
> This work introduced in Flink 1.15 helps achieve the above advantages by continuously 
> persisting state changes on a non-volatile storage, while performing materialization 
> in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Flink 1.15, we introduced the MVP feature of the
[changelog state](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog)
backend, which aims at 
making checkpoint intervals shorter with the following advantages:

1. Less work on recovery: The more frequently a checkpoint is taken, the fewer events 
   need to be re-processed after recovery.
2. Lower latency for transactional sinks: Transactional sinks commit on checkpoints, 
   so faster checkpoints mean more frequent commits.
3. More predictable checkpoint intervals: Currently the length of the checkpoint mainly
   depends on the size of the artifacts that need to be persisted on the checkpoint 
   storage and by keeping the size small, it becomes more predictable.

The changelog state backend helps achieve the above by continuously 
persisting state changes on non-volatile storage while performing materialization 
in the background.
```

### Adaptive batch scheduler

In 1.15, we introduced a new scheduler to Apache Flink: the 
[Adaptive Batch Scheduler](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#adaptive-batch-scheduler). 
The new scheduler can automatically decide parallelisms of job vertices for batch jobs, 
according to the size of data volume each vertex needs to process.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Repeatable Cleanup

In previous releases of Flink, cleaning up job-related artifacts was done only once which might have resulted in abandoned artifacts in case of an error. In this version, Flink will try to run the cleanup again to avoid leaving artifacts behind. This retry mechanism runs until it was successful, by default. Users can change this behavior by configuring the [repeatable cleanup options](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#retryable-cleanup). Disabling the retry strategy will lead to Flink behaving like in previous releases.

There is still work in progress around cleaning up Checkpoints, which is covered by [FLINK-26606](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26606).
```
Just in case this was missed accidentally. I think, the repeatable cleanup should end up in the release blog post as well. Feel free to adapt my proposal for the paragraph.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion @XComp. We only picked a few features to highlight them. For sure repeatable cleanups is an important/interesting thing, but initially we decided against it. Let's see what else pops up or we can add it as a dedicated paragraph or mention it in the what else section of that part.

Reviewer 2: That's alright - if you guys considered it to be less important. I'm fine with keeping it out of the blog post. 👍 
My only concern was that users might not be aware of Flink's default behavior chaning in that regards... The job cleanup is not visualized in the UI, yet.

> ### Other things worth mentioning
> 
> There have been improvements to the application mode. Jobs that should take a savepoint 
> after they are completed, can now guarantee they do so 
> ([see execution.shutdown-on-application-finish](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#execution-shutdown-on-application-finish)). 
> Recovery and clean up of jobs running in application mode have been improved. The local 
> state can be persisted in the working directory to improve the experience of recovering 
> from local storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Improvements to application mode

When running Flink in [application mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.14/docs/deployment/overview/), it can now be guaranteed that jobs will take a savepoint after they are completed if they have been configured to do so
([see execution.shutdown-on-application-finish](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#execution-shutdown-on-application-finish)). 

The recovery and clean up of jobs running in application mode has also been improved. The local 
state can be persisted in the working directory, which makes recovering 
from local storage easier.
```

> ## Unification of stream and batch processing - once more
> 
> In the latest release the unification of stream and batch processing is the main topic. 
> This time some new efforts have been picked up, others have been continued.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Unification of stream and batch processing - more progress

In the latest release, we picked up new efforts and continued some previous ones in the goal of unifying stream and batch processing.
```

### Final checkpoints

> In 1.14 final checkpoints were added as a feature that had to be enabled manually. 
> Since the last release users have been providing feedback to the community that has 
> now been incorporated, giving us the confidence to enable it by default. For more 
> information and how to disable this feature please refer to the 
> [documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/checkpointing/#checkpointing-with-parts-of-the-graph-finished).
> This change in configuration can prolong the shutting down sequence of bounded 
> streaming jobs, as jobs have to wait for a final checkpoint before being allowed to 
> finish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Flink 1.14, final checkpoints were added as a feature that had to be enabled manually. 
Since the last release, we listened to user feedback and decided to enable it by default. For more 
information and how to disable this feature, please refer to the 
[documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/checkpointing/#checkpointing-with-parts-of-the-graph-finished).
This change in configuration can prolong the shutting down sequence of bounded 
streaming jobs because jobs have to wait for a final checkpoint before being allowed to 
finish.
```

### Window table-valued functions

[Window table-valued functions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/window-tvf/) 
have only been available for unbounded data streams. 
With this release they will also be usable in BATCH mode. While working on this, 
change window table-valued functions have also been improved in general by implementing 
a dedicated operator which no longer requires those window functions to be used with 
aggregators.

## Flink SQL

> Looking at the community metrics it is undoubted that Flink SQL is widely used and 
> becomes more popular every day. The community made several improvements but we’d 
> like to go into two in more detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Community metrics indicate that Flink SQL is widely used and becomes more popular every day. The community made several improvements but we’d like to go into two in more detail.
```

### CAST/Type system enhancements

> Data appears in all sorts and shapes but is often not in the type that you need 
> it to be. That’s why 
> [casting](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/types/#casting) 
> is one of the most common operations in SQL. In Flink 
> 1.15, the default behavior of a failing CAST has changed from returning a null to 
> returning an error. The new behavior is more compliant with the SQL standard. The old 
> casting behavior can still be used by calling the newly introduced TRY_CAST function. 
> Next to this change, many bugs have been fixed and improvements made to the casting 
> functionality, to make sure that you’re getting correct results. The old CAST behavior 
> can be restored via a configuration flag. The effort is very well illustrated in this 
> JIRA issue. See the Flink documentation for details. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data appears in all sorts and shapes but is often not in the type that you need 
it to be, which is why 
[casting](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/types/#casting) 
is one of the most common operations in SQL. In Flink 
1.15, the default behavior of a failing CAST has changed from returning a null to 
returning an error, which makes it more compliant with the SQL standard. The old 
casting behavior can still be used by calling the newly introduced TRY_CAST function
or restored via a configuration flag.

In addition, many bugs have been fixed and improvements made to the casting 
functionality, to ensure correct results. 
```

### JSON functions

JSON is one of the most popular data formats and SQL users increasingly need to build 
and read these data structures.  Multiple 
[JSON](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/functions/systemfunctions/#json-functions)
functions have been added to Flink SQL 

> according to the SQL 2016 standard. It allows users to inspect, create and modify JSON 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
according to the SQL 2016 standard. It allows users to inspect, create, and modify JSON 
```

strings using the Flink SQL dialect.

## Community enablement

> Enabling people to build streaming data pipelines to solve their use cases: That’s 
> what the Apache Flink community wants to do. The community is well aware that a 
> technology like Apache Flink is never used on its own and will always be part of a 
> bigger architecture. It is important to operate well on clouds, it is important to 
> connect to other systems, it is important to make the programming languages Apache 
> Flink supports work. Here’s what has been done in that regard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling people to build streaming data pipelines to solve their use cases is our goal. 
The community is well aware that a 
technology like Apache Flink is never used on its own and will always be part of a 
bigger architecture. Thus, it is important that Flink operates well in the cloud, 
connects seamlessly to other systems, and continues to support programming languages like Java and Python. 
```

> ### Cloud Interoperability
> 
> There are users operating Flink deployments in a cloud infrastructure of various 
> cloud providers, there are also services that offer to manage Flink deployments for 
> users on them. With Flink 1.15 an recoverable writer for Google Cloud Storage has 
> been added. Tidying up the connectors was also in scope and there has been work 
> especially on connectors for the AWS ecosystem. (e.g. 
> [KDS](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/kinesis/), 
> [Firehose](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/firehose/))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cloud interoperability

There are users operating Flink deployments in cloud infrastructures from various 
cloud providers. There are also services that offer to manage Flink deployments for 
users on their platform. 

In Flink 1.15, a recoverable writer for Google Cloud Storage has 
been added. We also organized the connectors in the Flink ecosystem and put some focus 
on connectors for the AWS ecosystem (i.e. 
[KDS](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/kinesis/), 
[Firehose](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/firehose/)).
```

> ### ElasticSearch sink
> 
> As said, there was significant work on Flink’s connector ecosystem; still we want 
> to mention the 
> [ElasticSearch sink](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/elasticsearch/)
> at this point, because it was implemented following 
> very closely the new connector interfaces offering asynchronous functionality as well 
> as end-to-end semantics. This sink will act as a role model going forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The Elasticsearch sink

There was significant work on Flink’s overall connector ecosystem, but we want to highlight the 
[Elasticsearch sink](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/elasticsearch/) because it was implemented with 
the new connector interfaces, which offers asynchronous functionality coupled with end-to-end semantics. 
This sink will act as a template to follow in the future.
```

> ### Scala-free flink
> 
> There was already a lengthy 
> [blogpost](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html) by Seth Wiesman 
> in February explaining the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
> Java API with any Scala version - including Scala 3. At the end it was continuing 
> on what was started in 1.14 - removing the Mesos integration -, Akka has been isolated, 
> the DataStream / DataSet Java API has been cleaned up and hid the Table API behind an 
> abstraction. There’s already a lot of traction in the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### A Scala-free Flink

A detailed 
[blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)  
already explains the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
Java API with any Scala version (including Scala 3). 

In the end, removing Scala is just part of a larger effort of cleaning up and updating
various technologies from the Flink ecosystem. 

Starting in Flink 1.14, we removed the Mesos integration, isolated Akka, deprecated the
DataSet Java API, and hid the Table API behind an abstraction. There’s already a lot of traction in the community towards these endeavors. 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Repeatable Cleanup

In previous releases of Flink, cleaning up job-related artifacts was done only once which might have resulted in abandoned artifacts in case of an error. In this version, Flink will try to run the cleanup again to avoid leaving artifacts behind. This retry mechanism runs until it was successful, by default. Users can change this behavior by configuring the [repeatable cleanup options](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#retryable-cleanup). Disabling the retry strategy will lead to Flink behaving like in previous releases.

There is still work in progress around cleaning up Checkpoints, which is covered by [FLINK-26606](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26606).
```
Just in case this was missed accidentally. I think, the repeatable cleanup should end up in the release blog post as well.

> ### Other changes that will further enable the community
> 
> Further work has been done on the 
> [connector testing framework](https://github.com/PatrickRen/flink/tree/master/flink-test-utils-parent/flink-connector-testing), 
> if you want to contribute a connector or improve one you should definitely have a 
> look at it. One of the probably long awaited features has been added, the 
> [CSV format](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/formats/csv/) 
> and the [small file compaction](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/filesystem/#compaction) 
> in the unified sink interface has been implemented. The sink API has been upgraded 
> to [version 2](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/sink2/StatefulSink.java)
> and we’d encourage every connector maintainer to upgrade this version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Other 

Further work has been done on the 
[connector testing framework](https://github.com/PatrickRen/flink/tree/master/flink-test-utils-parent/flink-connector-testing). If you want to contribute a connector or improve on one, you should definitely have a 
look. 

Some long-awaited features have been added, including the 
[CSV format](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/formats/csv/) 
and the [small file compaction](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/filesystem/#compaction) 
in the unified sink interface. 

The sink API has been upgraded 
to [version 2](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/sink2/StatefulSink.java)
and we encourage every connector maintainer to upgrade to this version.
```

> ## To sum it up
> 
> Apache Flink is now easier to operate, took another step towards aligning stream and 
> batch processing, became more accessible through some improvements in the SQL components 
> and integrates better with other technologies.Besides that it is worth mentioning that 
> the community - while working on everything listed above - has set up a new home for 
> the [CDC connectors](https://ververica.github.io/flink-cdc-connectors/release-2.1/index.html), 
> the [connector repository](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/Connectors) 
> will be externalized 
> ([once again see the elasticsearch sink as a first mover](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-elasticsearch/)) 
> and there is now a 
> [Kubernetes operator](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-kubernetes-operator-docs-main/) 
> ([announcement blogpost](https://flink.apache.org/news/2022/04/03/release-kubernetes-operator-0.1.0.html) 
> maintained by the community as well.
> 
> Going forward the community will continue focussing on making Apache Flink a true 
> unified stream and batch processor as well as better integrating into the cloud native 
> ecosystem that we see ever evolving and thriving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary

Apache Flink is now easier to operate, made even more progress towards aligning stream and 
batch processing, became more accessible through improvements in the SQL components, 
and now integrates better with other technologies. 

It is also worth mentioning that 
the community has set up a new home for 
the [CDC connectors](https://ververica.github.io/flink-cdc-connectors/release-2.1/index.html), 
the [connector repository](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/Connectors) 
will be externalized 
([with the Elasticsearch sink as a first example](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-elasticsearch/)), 
and there is now a 
[Kubernetes operator](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-kubernetes-operator-docs-main/) 
([announcement blogpost](https://flink.apache.org/news/2022/04/03/release-kubernetes-operator-0.1.0.html) 
maintained by the community.

Moving forward, the community will continue to focus on making Apache Flink a true 
unified stream and batch processor and work on better integrating Flink into the cloud-native 
ecosystem. 
```

> ## Upgrade Notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Notes on Upgrading
```

Author: i think "Upgrade Notes" is quite commonly used.

While we aim to make upgrades as smooth as possible, some of the changes require users 
to adjust some parts of the program when upgrading to Apache Flink 1.15. Please take a 
look at the <release notes> for a list of applicable adjustments and issues during 
upgrades.

## List of Contributors

> The Apache Flink community would like to thank each one of the contributors that have 
> made this release possible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Apache Flink community would like to thank each and every one of the contributors that have 
made this release possible:
```

Ada Wong, Ahmed Hamdy, Aitozi, Alexander Fedulov, Alexander Preuß, Alexander Trushev, 
Ali Bahadir Zeybek, Anton Kalashnikov, Arvid Heise, Bernard Joseph Jean Bruno, Bo Cui, 

> Brian Zhou, Camile, ChangLi, Chengkai Yang, Chesnay Schepler, Daisy T, Danny Cranmer, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Brian Zhou, Camile, ChangLi, Chengkai Yang, Chesnay Schepler, Daisy Tsang, Danny Cranmer, 
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing the Release of Apache Flink 1.15"
subtitle: ""
date: 2022-04-11T08:00:00.000Z
categories: news
authors:
- yungao:
  name: "Yun Gao"
  twitter: "YunGao16"
- joemoe:
  name: "Joe Moser"
  twitter: "JoemoeAT"

---

Thanks to our well-organized and open community, Apache Flink continues 
[to grow](https://www.apache.org/foundation/docs/FY2021AnnualReport.pdf) as a 
technology and remain one of the most active projects in
the Apache community. With the release of Flink 1.15, we are proud to announce a number of 
exciting changes.

One of the main concepts that makes Apache Flink stand out is the unification of 
batch (aka bounded) and stream (aka unbounded) data processing. A lot of 
effort went into this unification in the previous releases but you can expect more efforts in this direction. 
Apache Flink is not only growing when it comes to contributions and users, but
also out of the original use cases. We are seeing a trend towards more business/analytics 

> use cases implemented in low-/no-code. Flink SQL is the feature in the Flink ecosystem that enables such uses cases and is why its popularity continues to grow.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use cases implemented in low-/no-code. Flink SQL is the feature in the Flink ecosystem that enables such uses cases and this is why its popularity continues to grow.  
```
Still feeling that "this" is missing here 8)

At the core of SQL upgrades are JSON plans 
([please note that we only have documentation in our JavaDocs for now and are still working on updating the documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/api/java/org/apache/flink/table/api/CompiledPlan.html)), which are JSON functions that make it easier to import and export structured data in SQL. This has been introduced for 
internal use already in previous releases and will now be exposed externally. Both the Table API 
and SQL will provide a way to compile and execute a plan which guarantees the same 
topology throughout different versions. This feature will be released as an experimental MVP. 
Users who want to give it a try already can create a JSON plan that can then be used 
to restore a Flink job based on the old operator structure. The full feature can be expected 
in Flink 1.16.

Reliable upgrades makes Flink SQL more dependable for production use cases in the long term. 

### Changelog state backend

In Flink 1.15, we introduced the MVP feature of the
[changelog state](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog)

> backend, which aims at 

Reviewer 3: [changelog state](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog) backend
 => 
[changelog state backend](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog)

> making checkpoint intervals shorter with the following advantages:

Reviewer 3: making checkpoint intervals shorter with the following advantages:
=>
making checkpoint intervals shorter and more predictable with the following advantages:

1. Less work on recovery: The more frequently a checkpoint is taken, the fewer events 
   need to be re-processed after recovery.
2. Lower latency for transactional sinks: Transactional sinks commit on checkpoints, 
   so faster checkpoints mean more frequent commits.
3. More predictable checkpoint intervals: Currently the length of the checkpoint mainly
   depends on the size of the artifacts that need to be persisted on the checkpoint 

>    storage and by keeping the size small, it becomes more predictable.

Reviewer 3: 1. Shorter end-to-end latency: end-to-end latency mostly depends on the checkpointing mechanism, especially for transactional sinks. Transactional sinks commit on checkpoints, so faster checkpoints mean more frequent commits.
2. More predictable checkpoint intervals: currently checkpointing time largely depends on the size of the artifacts that need to be persisted on the checkpoint storage. By keeping the size consistently small, checkpointing time becomes more predictable.
3. Less work on recovery: with more frequently checkpoints are taken, less data need to be re-processed after each recovery.

> The changelog state backend helps achieve the above by continuously 

Reviewer 3: the above => the above advantages

> persisting state changes on non-volatile storage while performing materialization 

Reviewer 3: materialization => state materialization

in the background.

### Adaptive batch scheduler

In 1.15, we introduced a new scheduler to Apache Flink: the 
[Adaptive Batch Scheduler](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#adaptive-batch-scheduler). 
The new scheduler can automatically decide parallelisms of job vertices for batch jobs, 

> according to the size of data volume each vertex needs to process.

Reviewer 4: I propose to add the benefits of adaptive batch scheduler, as below:

```
Major benefits of this scheduler includes:
1. Ease-of-use: Batch job users can be relieved from parallelism tuning.
2. Adaptive: Automatically tuned parallelisms can better fit consumed datasets which have a varying volume size every day.
3. Fine-grained: Parallelism of each job vertex will be tuned individually. This allows vertices of SQL batch jobs to be automatically assigned different proper parallelisms.
```

Reviewer 4: I also think it's better to move this section to be right below section "Elastic scaling with reactive mode and the adaptive scheduler", because they are a bit "similar" to users.

> ### Repeatable Cleanup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Repeatable cleanup
```

In previous releases of Flink, cleaning up job-related artifacts was done only once which might have resulted in abandoned artifacts in case of an error. In this version, Flink will try to run the cleanup again to avoid leaving artifacts behind. This retry mechanism runs until it was successful, by default. Users can change this behavior by configuring the [repeatable cleanup options](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#retryable-cleanup). Disabling the retry strategy will lead to Flink behaving like in previous releases.

> There is still work in progress around cleaning up Checkpoints, which is covered by [FLINK-26606](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26606).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is still work in progress around cleaning up checkpoints, which is covered by [FLINK-26606](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26606).
```

[Firehose](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/firehose/)).

### The Elasticsearch sink

There was significant work on Flink’s overall connector ecosystem, but we want to highlight the 
[Elasticsearch sink](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/elasticsearch/) because it was implemented with 
the new connector interfaces, which offers asynchronous functionality coupled with end-to-end semantics. 
This sink will act as a template to follow in the future.

### A Scala-free Flink

A detailed 
[blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)  
already explains the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
Java API with any Scala version (including Scala 3). 

In the end, removing Scala is just part of a larger effort of cleaning up and updating
various technologies from the Flink ecosystem. 

Starting in Flink 1.14, we removed the Mesos integration, isolated Akka, deprecated the
DataSet Java API, and hid the Table API behind an abstraction. There’s already a lot of traction in the community towards these endeavors. 

> 

Reviewer 5: Could we add a section about PyFlink? It could be looked as following:
```
## PyFlink

Before Flink 1.15, Python user-defined functions will be executed in separate Python processes which will bring additional serialization/deserialization overhead and also communication overhead. In scenarios where the data size is big, e.g. image processing, etc, this overhead becomes non-negligible. Besides, since it involves inter-process communication, the processing latency is also non-negligible, which is unacceptable in scenarios where the latency is critical, e.g. quantitative transaction, etc. In Flink 1.15, we have introduced a new execution mode named 'thread' mode, where the Python user-defined functions will be executed in the JVM as a thread instead of a separate Python process. Benchmark has shown that the throughput could be increased by 2x in common scenarios such as json processing. The processing latency is also decreased from several seconds to micro-seconds. It should be noted that since this is still the first release of 'thread' mode, it currently only supports Python ScalarFunction which is used in Python Table API & SQL. We're planning to extend it to other places where Python user-defined functions could be used in the next releases.
```

connectors and formats. And yes we enabled a Scala-free runtime 
([the hype is real](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)).

## Operating Apache Flink with ease

Even Flink jobs that have been built and tuned by the best engineering teams still need to 
be operated, usually on a long-term basis. The many deployment 
patterns, APIs, tuneable configs, and use cases covered by Apache Flink mean that operation
support is vital and can be burdensome.

In this release, we listened to user feedback and now operating Flink is made much 
easier. It is now more transparent in terms of handling checkpoints and savepoints and their ownership, 
which makes auto-scaling more seamless and complete (by removing side effects of use cases 
where different data sources produce varying amounts of data) and enables the  
ability to upgrade SQL jobs without losing the state. 

### Clarification of checkpoint and savepoint semantics

An essential cornerstone of Flink’s fault tolerance strategy is based on 
[checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints/) and 

> [savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/) (see [the comparison](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints_vs_savepoints/). 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/) (see [the comparison](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints_vs_savepoints/)). 
```

The purpose of savepoints has always been to put transitions, 
backups, and upgrades of Flink jobs in the control of users. Checkpoints, on 
the other hand, are intended to be fully controlled by Flink and guarantee fault 
tolerance through fast recovery, failover, etc. Both concepts are quite similar and 
the underlying implementation also shares aspects of the same ideas. 

However, both concepts grew apart by following specific feature requests and sometimes 
neglecting the overarching idea and strategy. Based on user feedback, it became apparent that this should be 
aligned and harmonized better and, above all, to make more clear! 

There have been situations in which users relied on checkpoints to stop/restart jobs when savepoints would have 
been the right way to go. It was also not clear that savepoints are slower since they don’t include 
some of the features that make taking checkpoints so fast. In some cases like 
resuming from a retained checkpoint in which the checkpoint is somehow considered a 

> a savepoint, it is unclear to the user when they can actually clean it up. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
resuming from a retained checkpoint — where the checkpoint is somehow considered as
a savepoint — it is unclear to the user when they can actually clean it up. 
```

With [FLIP-193 (Snapshots ownership)](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-193%3A+Snapshots+ownership) 
the community aims to make the ownership the only difference between savepoint and 
checkpoint. In the 1.15 release the community has fixed some of those shortcomings 
by supporting 

> [native and incremental savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#savepoint-format). 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With [FLIP-193 (Snapshots ownership)](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-193%3A+Snapshots+ownership) 
the community aims to make ownership the only difference between savepoints and 
checkpoints and has fixed some of those shortcomings 
by supporting 
[native and incremental savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#savepoint-format). 
```

longer than doing it in an incremental way. With 1.15 if users use the native format 
to take savepoints as well as the RocksDB state backend, savepoints will be 
automatically taken in an incremental manner. The documentation has also been 
clarified to provide a better overview and understanding of the differences between 
checkpoints and savepoints. The semantics for 
[resuming from savepoint/retained checkpoint](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#resuming-from-savepoints) 
have also been clarified introducing the CLAIM and NO_CLAIM mode. With 
the CLAIM mode Flink takes over ownership of an existing snapshot, with NO_CLAIM it 
creates its own copy and leaves the existing one up to the user. Please note that 
NO_CLAIM mode is the new default behavior. The old semantic of resuming from 
savepoint/retained checkpoint is still accessible but has to be manually selected by 
choosing LEGACY mode.

### Elastic scaling with reactive mode and the adaptive scheduler

Driven by the increasing number of cloud services built on top of Apache Flink, the 
project is increasingly cloud native which makes elastic 

> scaling more and more important. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Driven by the increasing number of cloud services built on top of Apache Flink, the 
project is becoming more and more cloud-native which makes elastic 
scaling even more important. 
```

This release improves metrics for the [reactive mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#reactive-mode), which is a job-scope mode where the JobManager will try to use all TaskManager resources available. To do this, we made all the metrics in 
the Job scope work correctly when reactive mode is enabled 

> ([yes, only limitations have been removed from the documentation](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/17766/files)). 

Reviewer 6: Not sure what this reference to the PR is supposed to add for the reader...
I would just remove it and go with:
```suggestion
the Job scope work correctly when reactive mode is enabled.
```

We also added an exception history for the [adaptive scheduler](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-160%3A+Adaptive+Scheduler), which is a new scheduler that first declares the required resources and waits for them before deciding on the parallelism with which to execute a job. 

> Furthermore, downscaling is sped up by 10x. The TaskManager now has a dedicated 

Reviewer 6: I fear that we are promising too much here - this downscaling speed probably does not include state restore,...for the new job getting started at a lower parallelism...

connects seamlessly to other systems, and continues to support programming languages like Java and Python. 

### Cloud interoperability

There are users operating Flink deployments in cloud infrastructures from various 
cloud providers. There are also services that offer to manage Flink deployments for 
users on their platform. 

In Flink 1.15, a recoverable writer for Google Cloud Storage has 
been added. We also organized the connectors in the Flink ecosystem and put some focus 
on connectors for the AWS ecosystem (i.e. 
[KDS](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/kinesis/), 
[Firehose](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/firehose/)).

### The Elasticsearch sink

There was significant work on Flink’s overall connector ecosystem, but we want to highlight the 
[Elasticsearch sink](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/elasticsearch/) because it was implemented with 
the new connector interfaces, which offers asynchronous functionality coupled with end-to-end semantics. 

> This sink will act as a template to follow in the future.

Reviewer 6: I don't quite get the last sentence - what will follow in the future?

### A Scala-free Flink

> A detailed 
> [blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)  
> already explains the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
> Java API with any Scala version (including Scala 3). 

Reviewer 6: Not sure why, but at least Github's markdown interpreter adds a line break after the link - maybe the double-space at the end of its line? Please check with what Hugo is rendering there...
```suggestion
A detailed 
[blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html) 
already explains the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
Java API with any Scala version (including Scala 3). 
```

Reviewer 6: One more thing: I feel like we should highlight changes that users have to apply to their job dependencies.

Working on https://github.com/apache/flink-training/pull/48/files, I found these:
- `flink-clients_${scalaBinaryVersion}` ->`flink-clients`
- `flink-streaming-java_${scalaBinaryVersion}` -> `flink-streaming-java`
- `flink-runtime-web_${scalaBinaryVersion}` -> `flink-runtime-web`
- `flink-test-utils_${scalaBinaryVersion}` -> `flink-test-utils`

Author: i built the docs and it looks good, added a sentence about the dependencies.

In the end, removing Scala is just part of a larger effort of cleaning up and updating
various technologies from the Flink ecosystem. 

Starting in Flink 1.14, we removed the Mesos integration, isolated Akka, deprecated the
DataSet Java API, and hid the Table API behind an abstraction. There’s already a lot of traction in the community towards these endeavors. 

## PyFlink

Before Flink 1.15, Python user-defined functions were executed in separate Python 

> processes which caused additional serialization/deserialization andcommunication overhead. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
processes which caused additional serialization/deserialization and communication overhead. 
```
nit: missing an empty space

Author: thanks, good catch.
